Introduce ADR for Project CodeFlare test strategy (#6)
project-codeflare/adr: PCF-ADR-0004-codeflare-test-strategy.md

4. Run a smoke test, e.g. by running one of the e2e test cases, to make sure the operator current version is working correctly. 

##### Upgrade of the CodeFlare Operator installed via OLM

###### Description

Add a newer version of the CodeFlare operator bundle, replacing the latest released version from the channel subscribed to during the Installation of the CodeFlare Operator with OLM test case. Assert successful upgrade of the operator to the newer version, and run a smoke test, to make sure that newer version is working as expected. 

###### Scenario

> **Note**
> Note: Make sure to execute the Installation of the CodeFlare Operator with OLM test case first.

1. In the same codeflare-system Namespace (resp. Project), update the existing test-catalog CatalogSource resource, by pointing to the newly built OLM index image
2. Assert a new ClusterServiceVersion resource has been created for the newer operator version, and eventually reaches the CSVPhaseSucceeded phase
3. Run a smoke test, e.g., by running one of the e2e test cases, to make sure the operator current version is working correctly.

## Open Questions

> 1. Add observability test cases

Reviewer: I'd vote for us to include additional ADRS in the future / update this one later. Perhaps in the short-term we just create github issues to follow up on?

Reviewer 2: +1

Reviewer: @sutaakar once the issues are created could you update the ADR such that each open question links to the corresponding issue? Once that's done, I'm good to merge.

Author: @anishasthana I have added issue for observability test cases.
About integration tests (ODH), there are some basic tests in https://github.com/opendatahub-io/distributed-workloads/tree/main/tests . What is our approach to those tests, should we leverage/expand those tests?

Reviewer: I think we should expand/replace those tests as desired. We should not feel bound to reusing the existing bash-based tests.

Author: @anishasthana Added a link to task for adding/revising integration tests.

3. Wait until the Ray cluster is ready
4. Submit the test batch job to the Ray cluster
5. Wait until the job has completed
6. Assert the job status is successful
7. Delete the test AppWrapper resource
8. Assert all the resources have been successfully freed

##### Submit a Sample PyTorch Job directly via MCAD

Lower priority.

###### Description

Submit a test PyTorch batch job to the MCAD scheduler, in a user tenant, and assert successful completion of the job. Assert successful execution of the job, and clean-up of resources upon the batch job completion.

###### Scenario

1. Create a test Namespace (resp. Project)
2. Create a test AppWrapper resource with the following specifications:
``` 
apiVersion: mcad.ibm.com/v1beta1
kind: AppWrapper
spec:
 resources:
   GenericItems:
     - allocated: 0
       generictemplate:
         apiVersion: v1
         kind: Pod
         metadata:
         spec:
           containers:
             - command:
                 - bash
                 - '-c'
                 - >-

>                    torchrun --rdzv_backend c10d --rdzv_endpoint

Reviewer 3: This looks like its only spawning 1 node. Do we want to test it with at least 2 nodes being spun up?

Reviewer 2: We've reduced the sizing as much as possible initially, so the test suite can be executed in the free GitHub Actions runners, which have pretty limited compute resources. I think we can expand the test suite to cover more complex / distributed use cases in a second iteration. WDYT?

                   $TORCHX_RANK0_HOST:49782 --rdzv_id 'test-job'
                   --nnodes 1 --nproc_per_node 1 --node_rank '0' --tee 3 --role
                   '' mnist.py
               env:
                 - name: TORCHX_TRACKING_EXPERIMENT_NAME
                   value: default-experiment
                 - name: LOGLEVEL
                   value: WARNING
                 - name: TORCHX_JOB_ID
                   value: 'kubernetes_mcad://torchx/test-job'
                 - name: TORCHX_RANK0_HOST
                   value: localhost
                 - name: TORCHX_MCAD_MNIST_0_HOSTS
                   value: test-job

>                image: 'quay.io/michaelclifford/mnist-test:latest'

Reviewer 3: we probably want to move this image into the codeflare quay org.

Reviewer 2: It won't be necessary, as we managed to rely on the _generic_ PyTorch image, and have the test inputs dynamically mounted / installed: https://github.com/project-codeflare/codeflare-operator/pull/136/files#diff-a2425bf13e5157c5c381d21407a576c5c3b5260dc338514ef67bbc63990d7b64R80-R87

Author: Removed specific AppWrapper

# Define testing strategy for Project CodeFlare

|                |                          |
| -------------- | ------------------------ |
| Date           | 06/14/2023               |
| Scope          |                          |
| Status         | Proposed                 |
| Authors        | [Karel Suta](@sutaakar), [Antonin Stefanutti](@astefanutti)  |
| Supersedes     | N/A                      |
| Superseded by: | N/A                      |
| Issues         |                          |

> | Other docs:    | N/A                      |

Reviewer: Could you link to https://github.com/project-codeflare/adr/blob/main/PCF-ADR-0003-codeflare-release-process.md here?

Author: Done

## What

This ADR introduces an overview of testing strategy and approach for Project CodeFlare.

## Why

> Various components of project CodeFlare currently handle own testing in individual and uncoordinated way. Also there are no tests verifying interactions and compatibility between different components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Various components of Project CodeFlare currently handle their testing in individual and uncoordinated way. Additionally, there are no tests verifying interactions and compatibility between different components.
```

> This ADR aims to document unified approach for testing of various components, extending the testing section of [Release process ADR](https://github.com/project-codeflare/adr/blob/main/PCF-ADR-0003-codeflare-release-process.md#testing).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ADR aims to document a unified approach for testing of various components, extending the testing section of [Release process ADR](https://github.com/project-codeflare/adr/blob/main/PCF-ADR-0003-codeflare-release-process.md#testing).
```

| Unit testing                 | Yes               | Yes                  | No                    | Yes                       | Yes                      |
| End to end testing           | Yes               | Yes                  | No                    | Yes                       | Yes                      |
| Integration testing          | Optional          | Yes                  | No                    | Yes                       | Yes                      |
| Upgrade testing              | Optional          | Yes                  | No                    | Yes                       | Yes                      |

Glossary:

Manual testing	- Manual verification of the functionality.

Unit testing	- Unit tests covering the base functionality.

End to end testing 	- Testing including all CodeFlare components, running in a cloud.

Integration testing 	- Testing of interactions between ODH components and CodeFlare components in a cloud.

Upgrade testing	- Testing of component upgrades (deploy new operator version) in a cloud.

### Test Environment

> Test environment depends on resource requirements of execued tests. For unit tests we will leverage GitHub actions runner. For end to end/integration/upgrade testing we will currently use KinD cluster running on GitHub actions runner. In case the resources provided by GitHub actions runner are not sufficient we can consider alternatives like [testing farm](https://docs.testing-farm.io/general/0.1/index.html).

Reviewer: For the time being, this means that we will effectively _not_ be supporting InstaScale with the initial test implementation. I'm fine with that, just wanted to call it out.

> Test environment depends on resource requirements of execued tests. For unit tests we will leverage GitHub actions runner. For end to end/integration/upgrade testing we will currently use KinD cluster running on GitHub actions runner. In case the resources provided by GitHub actions runner are not sufficient we can consider alternatives like [testing farm](https://docs.testing-farm.io/general/0.1/index.html).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Test environment depends on resource requirements of executed tests. For unit tests we will leverage GitHub actions runner. For end to end/integration/upgrade testing we will currently use KinD cluster running on GitHub actions runner. In case the resources provided by GitHub actions runner are not sufficient we can consider alternatives like [testing farm](https://docs.testing-farm.io/general/0.1/index.html).
```

> Test environment depends on resource requirements of executed tests. For unit tests we will leverage GitHub actions runner. For end to end/integration/upgrade testing we will currently use KinD cluster running on GitHub actions runner. In case the resources provided by GitHub actions runner are not sufficient we can consider alternatives like [testing farm](https://docs.testing-farm.io/general/0.1/index.html).

Reviewer 2: We could mention we consider openshift-ci as well for testing on OpenShift.

Author: Added a note about OpenShift-CI

### Defect Management 

#### Bug logging
Bugs found by testing are reported as GitHub issues in respective repository. Every bug description has to contain steps to reproduce.

#### Bug fixing
Bugs are going to be fixed in a similar approach as new features - planned as part of sprint planning, fixed through PRs. If possible the fix contains test coverage, preventing the issue from happening again.

### Test Suite

#### E2E Test Cases

##### Setup

The following steps must be executed once, with a cluster admin role, as prerequisites to running the e2e test cases:
1. Provision a test Kubernetes cluster (resp. an OpenShift cluster)
2. Build the CodeFlare operator container image:
  * Clone the CodeFlare operator source code repository

>   * Checkout the branch to be tested, e.g., the PR feature branch

Reviewer 4: These can be combined with something like:
```
git clone --branch mytag0.1 --depth 1 https://example.com/my/repo.git
```
(note the `--branch` option is a bit misleading as it accepts any git ref)

Author: Added a note with the git command example

##### Submit a Sample PyTorch Job in a managed Ray Cluster

###### Description

Submit a test PyTorch batch job, to a Ray cluster managed by MCAD, in a user tenant, and assert successful completion of the job. Shutdown the Ray cluster, and assert successful freeing of resources.

###### Scenario

1. Create a test Namespace (resp. Project)
2. Create a test AppWrapper resource with the following specifications: https://github.com/project-codeflare/multi-cluster-app-dispatcher/blob/14d569bec1cd016dd41352e3c026f461d851f480/doc/usage/examples/kuberay/config/aw-raycluster.yaml
3. Wait until the Ray cluster is ready
4. Submit the test batch job to the Ray cluster
5. Wait until the job has completed
6. Assert the job status is successful
7. Delete the test AppWrapper resource
8. Assert all the resources have been successfully freed

##### Submit a Sample PyTorch Job directly via MCAD

Lower priority.

###### Description

Submit a test PyTorch batch job to the MCAD scheduler, in a user tenant, and assert successful completion of the job. Assert successful execution of the job, and clean-up of resources upon the batch job completion.

> ###### Scenario

Reviewer: I think the specifics of these cases should live in a design doc or something else. It may be too much technical detail for this ADR. @MichaelClifford what do you think?

Reviewer 3: @anishasthana I agree. I think the flow here is good for the ADR. But the implementation details might change. So we can probably get this ADR in faster if it does not have all this additional technical specification stuff here as well.

Author: Dropped technical specifications and replaced them with a general description.

1. Create a test Namespace (resp. Project)
2. Create a test AppWrapper resource with the following specifications:
``` 

> apiVersion: mcad.ibm.com/v1beta1

Reviewer 2: This can probably be eluded to keep the ADR concise.

Author: hmm, is there some link which I can use to reference this `AppWrapper`?

Author: Replaced by a general description

  * Build the CodeFlare operator container image at HEAD revision
  * Push the CodeFlare operator container image into a test container image registry (resp. the OpenShift cluster internal image registry)
  * Build the OLM bundle image
  * Push the OLM bundle image into a test container image registry (resp. the OpenShift cluster internal image registry)

4. Build the OLM index image:
  * Build the OLM index/catalog image with OPM from the latest Operator Hub community catalog (resp. OpenShift catalog), e.g.:
```
$ mkdir catalog
$ opm render registry.redhat.io/redhat/redhat-operator-index:<OCP_VERSION> -o yaml > catalog/bundles.yaml
$ opm render $BUNDLE_IMAGE > catalog/codeflare-operator-bundle.yaml
$ sedtemp=$(mktemp sed-template-XXX.sed)
$ cat << EOF > ${sedtemp}
/- name: codeflare-operator.v${PREVIOUS_VERSION}/ {
  p;
  n;
  /  replaces:/ {
    p;
    n;
    /name: alpha$/ {
      i- name: codeflare-operator.v${PREVIOUS_VERSION}
      i\ \ replaces: codeflare-operator.v${PREVIOUS_VERSION}
      p;
      d;
    }
  }
}
p;
EOF
$ sed -i -n -f ${sedtemp} ${CATALOG_DIR}/bundles.yaml

> $ rm -f ${sedtemp}

Reviewer 2: It can be replaced with the simpler sed command that does not try to preserve channel entries ordering.
